---
title: "Hello, world!"
date: 2021-03-15T10:39:37-04:00
draft: true
---

Welcome on my personnal website!

I wanted to do this for years but I always had a good reason (yeah right) to not do it. I recently started mentoring session with my incredible mentor [Gabriel LeBreton](www.gableroux.com) and one of my first assignment what to build myself a website. So here it is!

In here, I'm going to put my resume and mostly do blog posts about many subjects be it tech, psychology, philosophy, etc. I'm a passionnate individual, I read a lot and I love to learn new stuff on a broad range of subjects. I consider myself more of a generalist than specialist and I thrive to learn about anything that interests me in the moment. On top of that, I really like to share about what I learn and teach stuff to people. Before you read any further, I am sorry in advance for any typo encountered. English isn't my native language (french speaker) and those are my first writing experiences in english. If you spot any typo, please [open an issue here](https://github.com/giant995/jmplourde.com/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+sort%3Aupdated-desc) and I'll correct it.

Now a bit about me: I am Jean-Michel Plourde a diplomed IT technician, senior computer engineering student and a part time backend developer at [TLM](https://solutionstlm.com/). I discovered computers when I was around 8 years old, back in the days where you had to go to the library and pay internet usage by the hour. The first software I used was mIRC so me and my cousin could talk to strangers around the province. The passion really kicked in when I was about 12 years old, I even wrote in my yearbook that I want to be an engineer later. I totally forgot about that wish until 2 years ago when I reread my page for fun. I was very privileged that my parents could afford a computer back then, a beautiful pentium 4 with a cathodic screen, white kit for $4k (imagine the gaming setup you can have today for that money). I was obsessed with that computer, I spent a lot of time on it (maybe too much for a kid) and would experiment with it a lot. My parent learned it much later, but I used to open it and remove components and put them back to challenge myself and see what it the effect of removing it. My school library had like 2 books on computers and there was one I liked so much I was registering it every time my borrowing expired. I remember vividly being obsessed PCi (?) card to connect your TV to your computer. I wanted that device so bad, imagining all the cool things it could do. What a weird thing for a kid to be obsessed about, but I guess that would set my nerd career. Back then I didn't I could buy computer parts in my citym but I was sure this device was very expensive and I never got one.

My teacher spotted my interest for computers so when it was computer lab time, I was allowed to stay on the class computer to fix things she tasked me with. At that same time, I became friend with another geek in my class. He had the same interests as me like roleplaying games, board games, reading, computers, video games, etc. To this day we are very good friends, playing video games and DnD. During high school, we discovered Runescape and at every lunch time we would run to the cafeteria, eat our lunch in like 5 minutes and run to the computer lab to meet with our Runescape club. For my optional classes, I enrolled myself in a computer course with a very good teacher that gave us many interesting projects. I really enjoyed each projects: 3D modelling on blender, GIMP image processing, HTML/CSS coding in notepad, etc. I got along very well with Mr. Dolbec and he eventually asked me to help him with the sound and filming for a recording with elders for our local genealogy archive bureau. At the end of high school at around 17 years old, you have to choose a specialisation for cegep which is a preuniversity requirement. It's 2 years if you enroll in a program then get into university or 3 years if you do a technical diploma. 

Of course it wasn't hard at all for me so I got into a 3 years diploma to become a computer tech. At 17, I did my first lines of code in C++ and I knew from the start that I was in the right place. I met some great people there, some of wichi I still talk to these days. At the end of my diploma, I had to do a mandatory internship. The neighbour at my parents house was a computer tech for a school board so he gave my name to his director. I had a telephone interview with him and he gave me an internship on the spot despite saying they weren't looking for interns when we started. This is where I had the incredible opportunity to develop myself as a computer tech: I met incredible and talented people who taught me a lot about how it all works. At some point, an idea at the back of my head formed: What if I went to university? I wasn't sure since my current job paid good money, I was considered temporary employee but I was extended every 6 months and I would have ended with a permanent job thus being set for life and a sweet retirement plan. After 3 years there, I was hired at another school board which was closer to home. I was tired of commuting for 1.5 hours each day and it was dangerous during snow storms. 

At that new job, I was assigned to my old high school which was pretty weird. Some of my profs where still there and still remembered me, so I had the chance to let them know how each of them influenced me to who I am today. But after a couple of months, even though I knew I would eventually end up with a permanent job, I became very unhappy. I couldn't envision doing that for the next 40 years and that idea to get into university came back. The day before leaving for christmas vacations, I told my director I was leaving my job to get into university. I was suprised by his answer: "Yeah no problem! I understand that, I did pretty much the same move when I was your age. Congratulations and good luck!".

And here we are almost 4 years later into that computer engineering degree. Again I met a lot of inspiring and amazing people. I got involved in the robotic club, the local tech meetups and I organized some group activities to conventions, etc. I became friend with some people working at TLM and it proved to be an incredible luck. Later when I applied for an internship at TLM, people at the office knew my name and they recommended me, which helped me get it. That internship transformed into a full-time job during summer and a part time job during the semesters. This job is incredible: I have the chance to learn and collaborate with programming experts and I'm incredibly lucky for that opportunity.

If you've made it to the end, thank you. That's a big wall of text about my journey in tech, but now you know a little bit more about me and how I became who I am today. I will try to post at least once a month on my blog.
